---
title: "Expected Value and Variance"
author: "Andrés Aravena, PhD"
date: "2019-09-04 12:11"
category: Probabilities
mathjax: true
---

# Summary
A probability space is defined by two things: $Ω$ and $p.$

$Ω$ is the set of all possible outcomes. Can be finite or infinite. In most cases we will work with finite outcomes.

Each element $ω\inΩ$ is a single outcome.
Each experiment produces a unique outcome.

The probability mass function $p:Ω → ℝ$ is a function such that
$$0≤p(ω)≤ 1\quad ∀ ω∈ Ω$$
and
$$\sum_{ω\inΩ}p(ω)=1$$

## Questions
We can ask any question that can be answered *yes* or *no*, about a future outcome $ω.$
Any question is valid, as long as we can answer _yes_ or _no_ when we know $ω,$ the result of the experiment.
We can represent each question $Q(ω)$ as a subset $E$ of $Ω$
$$E=\{ω\inΩ: Q(ω)\text{ is true}\}$$
The question $Q(ω)$ is true iff $ω\in E$

## Events
An *event* is a subset $E\subset Ω$. It is also a yes-or-no question about a future outcome.
(Since $Ω$ is discrete, all questions are events. That may not be the case if $ω=ℝ$).

The probability of an event $E$ is
$$\Pr(E)=\sum_{ω\in E}p(ω)$$ 

## Simple and compound events
All events are subsets of $Ω.$
If the event $E=\{ω\}$ contains only one element, we call it a _simple event_.

In that case
$$\Pr(E)=\Pr(\{ω\})=p(ω)$$
Abusing the notation, we can write $$\Pr(ω)=\Pr(\{ω\})=p(ω)$$


## Notation
If $Q$ is a yes-no question, we will use the notation $［Q］$ to represent this:
$$［Q］=\begin{cases}1\quad\text{if }Q\text{ is true}\\
0\quad\text{if }Q\text{ is false}\end{cases}$$

Then instead of writing
$\Pr(E)=\sum_{ω\in E}p(ω)$
we can write
$$\Pr(E)=\sum_{ω}p(ω)［ω\in E］$$
